OSDOCS-17693: adds install to MCP gateway docs (#109364)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/proc-mcp-gateway-custom-route.adoc

//
// *mcp_gateway_install/mcp-gateway-install.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="proc-mcp-gateway-custom-route_{context}"]
= Applying a customized HTTPRoute object

[role="_abstract"]
In many production environments, you are likely to require a custom `HTTPRoute` object for your MCP gateway. For example, if any of the following situations apply, use a custom HTTP route:

* An identity provider protects your MCP gateway.
//Q: in this case, do we need to have configured auth policies already?
* You have a web-based AI chat interface that requires cross-origin resource sharing (CORS) headers so that one domain can talk to the other.
* You need additional path rules for things such as version switching, health check services, and tool dashboards.

.Prerequisites

* You installed {ocp}.
* You installed {oc-first}.
* You installed {prodname}.
* You installed the {mcpg} Operator.
* You configured at least one listener.
* You created a `MCPGatewayExtension` CR.

.Procedure

//Q: what happens if i don't delete one that is hanging around?

. Delete any automatically created HTTPRoutes by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ oc delete httproute mcp-gateway-route -n _<mcp_gateway_one>_ --ignore-not-found

Reviewer: Prob better to do this after the command on line 43 as the operator may just recreate it

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// *mcp_gateway_install/mcp-gateway-install.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="proc-mcp-gateway-custom-route_{context}"]
= Applying a customized HTTPRoute object

[role="_abstract"]
In many production environments, you are likely to require a custom `HTTPRoute` object for your MCP gateway. For example, if any of the following situations apply, use a custom HTTP route:

* An identity provider protects your MCP gateway.
* You have a web-based AI chat interface that requires cross-origin resource sharing (CORS) headers so that one domain can talk to the other.
* You need additional path rules for things such as version switching, health check services, and tool dashboards.

.Prerequisites

* You installed {ocp}.
* You installed {oc-first}.
* You installed {prodname}.
* You installed the {mcpg} Operator.
* You configured at least one listener.
* You created a `MCPGatewayExtension` CR.

.Procedure

. If you have not already done so, disable automatic route creation on your corresponding `MCPGatewayExtension` object by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ oc patch mcpgatewayextension -n mcp-system your-extension-name \

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
$ oc patch mcpgatewayextension -n _<mcp_system>_ _<extension_name>_ \
```

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="proc-mcp-gateway-custom-route_{context}"]
= Applying a customized HTTPRoute object

[role="_abstract"]
In many production environments, you are likely to require a custom `HTTPRoute` object for your MCP gateway. For example, if any of the following situations apply, use a custom HTTP route:

* An identity provider protects your MCP gateway.
* You have a web-based AI chat interface that requires cross-origin resource sharing (CORS) headers so that one domain can talk to the other.
* You need additional path rules for things such as version switching, health check services, and tool dashboards.

.Prerequisites

* You installed {ocp}.
* You installed {oc-first}.
* You installed the {mcpg} Operator.
* You configured at least one listener.
* You created a `MCPGatewayExtension` CR.

.Procedure

. If you have not already done so, disable automatic route creation on your corresponding `MCPGatewayExtension` object by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc patch mcpgatewayextension -n _<mcp_system>_ _<extension_name>_ \
  --type merge -p '{"spec":{"httpRouteManagement":"Disabled"}}'
----
+

> Replace `_<mcp_system>_` with the name of your {mcpg} deployment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Replace `_<mcp_system>_` with the namespace where {mcpg} is installed.
```

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// *mcp_gateway_install/mcp-gateway-install.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="proc-mcp-gateway-custom-route_{context}"]
= Applying a customized HTTPRoute object

[role="_abstract"]
In many production environments, you are likely to require a custom `HTTPRoute` object for your MCP gateway. For example, if any of the following situations apply, use a custom HTTP route:

* An identity provider protects your MCP gateway.
* You have a web-based AI chat interface that requires cross-origin resource sharing (CORS) headers so that one domain can talk to the other.
* You need additional path rules for things such as version switching, health check services, and tool dashboards.

.Prerequisites

* You installed {ocp}.
* You installed {oc-first}.

> * You installed {prodname}.

Reviewer 3: No need for RHCL here

* You installed the {mcpg} Operator.
* You configured at least one listener.
* You created a `MCPGatewayExtension` CR.

.Procedure

. If you have not already done so, disable automatic route creation on your corresponding `MCPGatewayExtension` object by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc patch mcpgatewayextension -n _<mcp_system>_ _<extension_name>_ \
  --type merge -p '{"spec":{"httpRouteManagement":"Disabled"}}'
----
+
Replace `_<mcp_system>_` with the name of your {mcpg} deployment.
Replace `_<extension_name>_` with the name of your `MCPGatewayExtension` CR.

. Create your customized `HTTPRoute` CR by using the following template:
+
.Example customized HTTPRoute CR
[source,yaml,subs="+quotes"]
----
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: HTTPRoute
metadata:
  name: _<mcp_route>_
  namespace: _<mcp_system>_
spec:
  parentRefs:
    - name: _<gateway_name>_

>       namespace: _<gateway_namespace>_

Reviewer 3: I would add sectionName: _<mcp>_ here and say that it has to match the name of one of the listeners configured in the Gateway  CR (the MCP Gateway Listener one)

            add:
              - name: Access-Control-Allow-Origin
                value: "*"
              - name: Access-Control-Allow-Methods
                value: "GET, POST, PUT, DELETE, OPTIONS, HEAD"
              - name: Access-Control-Allow-Headers
                value: "Content-Type, Authorization, Accept, Origin, X-Requested-With"
              - name: Access-Control-Max-Age
                value: "3600"
              - name: Access-Control-Allow-Credentials
                value: "true"
      backendRefs:
        - name: _<mcp_gateway>_
          port: 8080
    - matches:
        - path:
            type: PathPrefix
            value: _</.well_known/oauth_protected_resource>_
      backendRefs:
        - name: _<mcp_gateway>_
          port: 8080
----
+
* Replace the `metadata.name:` value with the name that you want to use.
* Replace the `metadata.namespace:` value with the namespace that you want to use.
* Replace the `spec.parentRefs.name:` value the name that you want to use.
* Replace `spec.parentRefs.namespace:` value with the namespace that you want to use.
* Replace the `spec.hostnames:` value or list with the values you want to use.

> * Replace the `spec.rules.matches.path.value:` value with a reference to your `AuthPolicy` CR.

Reviewer 3: This has nothing to do with AuthPolicy CR. This is URL path where you want to have your Gateway available, typically `/mcp`

* Replace the `spec.rules.backend.Refs.name:` value with the name of your MCP gateway deployment.

. Apply the CR by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal,subs="+quotes"]
----
$ oc apply -f _<mcp_route>_
----
+
Replace `_<mcp_route>_` with the name that you used for your `HTTPRoute` CR.

. Delete automatically created `HTTPRoute` CRs by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ oc delete httproute mcp-gateway-route -n _<mcp_gateway_one>_ --ignore-not-found

Reviewer 3: using `-n _<mcp_system>_` would be better - more consistent with the "creation of this HTTPRoute" example a bit above.
If you are to update this, update the occurrence below as well.

* An identity provider protects your MCP gateway.
* You have a web-based AI chat interface that requires cross-origin resource sharing (CORS) headers so that one domain can talk to the other.
* You need additional path rules for things such as version switching, health check services, and tool dashboards.

.Prerequisites

* You installed {ocp}.
* You installed {oc-first}.
* You installed {prodname}.
* You installed the {mcpg} Operator.
* You configured at least one listener.
* You created a `MCPGatewayExtension` CR.

.Procedure

. If you have not already done so, disable automatic route creation on your corresponding `MCPGatewayExtension` object by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc patch mcpgatewayextension -n mcp-system your-extension-name \
  --type merge -p '{"spec":{"httpRouteManagement":"Disabled"}}'
----

. Create your customized `HTTPRoute` CR by using the following template:
+
.Example customized HTTPRoute CR
[source,yaml,subs="+quotes"]
----
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: HTTPRoute
metadata:
  name: _<mcp_route>_
  namespace: _<mcp_system>_

>   annotations:

Reviewer 2: Annotations need to be indented

* Replace `spec.parentRefs.namespace:` value with the namespace that you want to use.
* Replace the `spec.hostnames:` value or list with the values you want to use.
* Replace the `spec.rules.matches.path.value:` value with a reference to your `AuthPolicy` CR.
* Replace the `spec.rules.backend.Refs.name:` value with the name of your MCP gateway deployment.
+
[IMPORTANT]
====
In the MCP gateway Technology Preview version, `0.6.0`, you must set the `annotations.kuadrant.io/mcp-managed: "false"` value if you are using OAuth. You must also set the `spec.httpRouteManagement:` field value to `Disabled` in your corresponding `MCPGatewayExtension` CR. This is a workaround for a Known Issue. See the {prodname} 1.3.3 release notes for details.
====

. Apply the CR by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal,subs="+quotes"]
----
$ oc apply -f _<mcp_route>_
----
+
Replace _<mcp_route>_ with the name that you used for your `HTTPRoute` CR.

. Delete any automatically created HTTPRoutes by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc delete httproute mcp-gateway-route -n _<mcp_gateway_one>_ --ignore-not-found
----
+
Replace _<mcp_gateway_one>_ with name you used.

> //Q: what happens if i skip deleting? does it conflict, or take the latest?

Reviewer 2: No error — both routes coexist silently. The Gateway API spec defines a precedence chain for when multiple HTTPRoutes match the same request:
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
  1. Most specific match wins — longer path beats shorter, Exact beats PathPrefix, more header/query matches beats fewer
  2. Oldest route by creation timestamp — only if specificity is equal                                                                                                                                     
  3. Alphabetical by {namespace}/{name} — only if timestamps are also equal                                                                                                                                
   
  In this case, both the auto-created mcp-gateway-route and the custom route match PathPrefix: /mcp with the same path length and no additional match criteria — so specificity is equal and it falls through to the timestamp tiebreaker. Since mcp-gateway-route was created first, it wins and the custom route's filters (CORS, OAuth) are silently ignored.

https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/reference/spec/#httprouterule — defines the full precedence chain

@david-martin does this sound about right to you?

Reviewer 4: Yes, that's my understanding of the wording in the API reference there.

* An identity provider protects your MCP gateway.
* You have a web-based AI chat interface that requires cross-origin resource sharing (CORS) headers so that one domain can talk to the other.
* You need additional path rules for things such as version switching, health check services, and tool dashboards.

.Prerequisites

* You installed {ocp}.
* You installed {oc-first}.
* You installed {prodname}.
* You installed the {mcpg} Operator.
* You configured at least one listener.
* You created a `MCPGatewayExtension` CR.

.Procedure

. If you have not already done so, disable automatic route creation on your corresponding `MCPGatewayExtension` object by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc patch mcpgatewayextension -n mcp-system your-extension-name \
  --type merge -p '{"spec":{"httpRouteManagement":"Disabled"}}'
----

. Create your customized `HTTPRoute` CR by using the following template:
+
.Example customized HTTPRoute CR
[source,yaml,subs="+quotes"]
----
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: HTTPRoute
metadata:
  name: _<mcp_route>_
  namespace: _<mcp_system>_
  annotations:

>     kuadrant.io/mcp-managed: "false"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Looking closer at this , this annotation is deprecated and is superseded by spec.httpRouteManagement: Disabled on the  MCPGatewayExtension CR

Author: Ah, we have this here for the known issue, 

> In the MCP gateway Technology Preview version, `0.6.0`, you must set the `annotations.kuadrant.io/mcp-managed: "false"` value if you are using OAuth.

Reviewer 4: I know nothing about this annotation, and couldn't find any references to it on main, or in recent PRs.
Where did this come from?
Feel like I'm missing something ( @maleck13 do you know? )

Reviewer: Yes I don't think this is actually needed. It is possible it was left over from an earlier iteration?

Author: @maleck13 I thought that for this issue, https://github.com/Kuadrant/mcp-gateway/issues/776, we need to have both the annotation and `spec.httpRouteManagement:  Disabled` in the extension. If not, all the better!
